interfaces: review and extend README.md (#13247)
snapcore/snapd: interfaces/builtin/README.md

In other words, snap-declaration (store) rules have priority over
base-declaration rules; then, plug rules have priority over slot rules, and

> finally, deny rules have priority over allow rules within a stanza.

Author: I'm changing it to "within the same stanza",  deny overrides allow but in the same stanza.  The rest of the order/hierarchy is stronger than deny vs allow. Which the old text wasn't very clear about, it made it sound that a deny from a ignored stanza would actually affect an allow from the used stanza/level.

in the base-declaration are said to be “**super-privileged**”, meaning they
cannot be used at all without a snap-declaration assertion.

Snap interfaces with slots that can be provided by application or gadget snaps
that have `allow-installation` set to `false` for their slot in the
base-declaration are said to have “**super-privileged** slots”. An application
snap or gadget defining such slots cannot be used at all without a

> snap-declaration assertion.

Author: I tried to simplify this a bit

The `on-store`, `on-brand`, and `on-model` rules are not generally hardcoded in
the snapd interfaces, but are specified in store assertions; they are known as
“device context constraints” and are primarily used to ensure that a given rule
only applies to a device with a serial assertion (and thus model assertion)

> from a given brand or using a given store (as specified by the model).

Author: thanks

  
      manual-connected-provided-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - app                      # app provided slot
        deny-connection: true          # require allow-connection in snap decl
        deny-auto-connection: true     # force manual connect

As some slots can be provided by both the system or an application snap, some interfaces will be in more than one category.

Auto-connection should be allowed in the base-declaration if the access to the
resources provided by the interface does not have security implications.

App-provided slots use 'deny-connection: true' since slot implementations
require privileged access to the system and the snap must be trusted. In this
manner, a snap declaration for the slot-providing snap is required to override
the base declaration to allow connections with the app-provided slot.

Slots dealing with hardware will typically specify 'gadget' and 'core' as
the slot-snap-type (eg, serial-port). Eg:

    slots:
      manual-connected-hw-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - core
            - gadget
        deny-auto-connection: true

> Denying auto-connection both stops access but also covers the fact that there

Author: thanks

        plug-attributes:
          content: $SLOT(content)

## Unasserted local installation

> When a snap in installed without matching assertions using `--dangerous`, many
> checks are not performed with the aim to enable local development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a snap in installed without matching assertions using `--dangerous`, many
checks are not performed. This helps with local snap development.
```

> For installation only any slot-snap-type constraint in a base-declaration
> `allow-installation` rule for slots is checked. Here any `deny-installation`
> rule is ignored. Nothing is checked for the snap plugs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For installation only, any slot-snap-type constraint in a base-declaration
`allow-installation` rule for slots is checked. Any `deny-installation`
rule here is ignored. Nothing is checked for the snap plugs.
```

For connections involving the snap, no rules are checked and it is always
allowed.

> For auto-connection the base-declaration and any rule for the other side if
> available is considered, this usually means no auto-connection will happen
> unless allowed by the base-declaration or by a slot-side snap-declaration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For auto-connection, the base-declaration and any rule for the other side (if
available) is considered. This usually means no auto-connection will happen
unless allowed by the base-declaration or by a slot-side snap-declaration.
```

## Base declaration policy patterns

This section discusses the patterns to follow when writing base declaration
rules for an interface (via setting

> `commonInterface.baseDeclarationSlots/Plugs`) depending on the security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`commonInterface.baseDeclarationSlots/Plugs`), depending on the security
```

characteristics of the interface.

> Slots for a specific interface can be provided by the system snap (so called
> implicit slots) or by an application snap or sometimes both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slots for a specific interface can be provided by the system snap (so called
implicit slots), by an application snap, or sometimes by both.
```

> The base declaration rules are for almost all interfaces and whenever possible
> written as slot-side-only rules. As reminder, importantly, items are not merged
> between the slots and plugs or between the base declaration and snap
> declaration for a particular type of rule. This means if one specifies a
> connection rule both on the slot-side and plug-side in the base declaration,
> only the plug side is used (plug-side override the slot side). Installation
> rules target their side only, a slot-side installation rule is about allowing
> snaps with a slot of the given interface, same for a plug-side installation
> rule being about snaps with a plug of the given interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For almost all interfaces, and whenever possible, the base declaration rules are
written as slot-side-only rules.

Importantly, items are not merged between the slots and plugs, or between the base declaration and snap declaration for a particular type of rule.

This means that if a connection rule for both the slot-side and plug-side is specified in the base declaration, only the plug side is used (plug-side overrides the slot side).

Installation rules target their side only; a slot-side installation rule is for allowing snaps with a slot of the given interface. A plug-side installation rule is for snaps with a plug of the given interface.
```

Interfaces can be broadly categorized as:

- auto-connected implicit slots (eg, network)
- manually connected implicit slots (eg, bluetooth-control)
- auto-connected app-provided slots  (eg, mir)
- manually connected app-provided slots (eg, bluez)

> such that they will follow this pattern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, that they will follow this pattern:
```

    slots:
      auto-connected-implicit-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - core                     # implicit slot
        #allow-auto-connection: true   # allow auto-connect, default
  
      manual-connected-implicit-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - core                     # implicit slot
        deny-auto-connection: true     # force manual connect
  
      auto-connected-provided-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - app                      # app provided slot
        deny-connection: true          # require allow-connection in snap decl
  
      manual-connected-provided-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - app                      # app provided slot
        deny-connection: true          # require allow-connection in snap decl
        deny-auto-connection: true     # force manual connect

As some slots can be provided by both the system or an application snap, some interfaces will be in more than one category.

> Auto-connection should be allowed in the base-declaration if the access to the
> resources provided by the interface does not have security implications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auto-connection should be allowed in the base-declaration if the access to the
resources provided by the interface do not have security implications.
```

Author: confused about this change,  "the access" ... "does", no?

App-provided slots use 'deny-connection: true' since slot implementations
require privileged access to the system and the snap must be trusted. In this

> manner a snap declaration for the slot-providing snap is required to override
> the base declaration to allow connections with the app-provided slot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
manner, a snap declaration for the slot-providing snap is required to override
the base declaration to allow connections with the app-provided slot.
```

> Slots dealing with hardware typically will specify 'gadget' and 'core' as
> the slot-snap-type (eg, serial-port). Eg:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slots dealing with hardware will typically specify 'gadget' and 'core' as
the slot-snap-type (eg, serial-port). Eg:
```

    slots:
      manual-connected-hw-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - core
            - gadget
        deny-auto-connection: true

Denying auto-connection both stops access but also covers the fact that there
might be multiple slots for an hardware interface for which there is no way to
choose one.

So called super-privileged plugs should also be disallowed installation on a
system and a snap declaration is required to override the base declaration to
allow installation (eg, kernel-module-control). Eg:

    plugs:
      manual-connected-super-privileged-plug:
        allow-installation: false
        deny-auto-connection: true
    (remember this overrides slot side rules)

This pattern makes sense for interfaces that carry great security risk and allow to take control outside of the sandbox, e.g. installing a kernel module.

> So called super-privileged slot implementations should also be disallowed
> installation on a system and a snap declaration is required to override the
> base declaration to allow installation (eg, docker). Eg:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So called super-privileged slot implementations should also be disallowed
installation on a system. A snap declaration is required to override the
base declaration to allow installation (eg, docker). Eg:
```

    slots:
      manual-connected-super-privileged-slot:
        allow-installation: false
        deny-connection: true
        deny-auto-connection: true

> This pattern make sense for interfaces where implementing them requires extensive system access, or there is need for review to check for policy or to avoid resource use/naming clashes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pattern make sense for interfaces where implementing them requires extensive system access, or where there is need for review to check for policy or to avoid resource use/naming clashes.
```

Some interfaces have policy that is meant to cover application snap slot
implementations but also classic systems. Since the slot implementation is
privileged, we require a snap declaration to be used for app-provided slot
implementations on non-classic systems (eg, `network-manager`). Eg:

    slots:
      classic-or-not-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - app
            - core
        deny-auto-connection: true
        deny-connection:
          on-classic: false

The idea of this pattern is that on classic we expect the slot to be system

> provided and for it to be app-provide on Core. Because of the work on Core
> Desktop this idea is not always valid, a different approach is to
> deny-connection based on the type of slot carrying snap, e.g for
> `upowser-observe` nowadays, we have:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provided and for it to be app-provide on Core. However, the work on Core
Desktop means this idea is not always valid. A different approach is to
deny-connection based on the type of slot carrying snap, e.g for
`upowser-observe` nowadays, we have:
```

    upower-observe:
      allow-installation:
        slot-snap-type:
          - app
          - core
      deny-auto-connection:
        slot-snap-type:
          - app
      deny-connection:
        slot-snap-type:
          - app

Some interfaces have only implicit slots and should be auto-connected only on classic systems (eg, home). Eg:

    slots:
      implicit-auto-classic-slot:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - core
        deny-auto-connection:
          on-classic: false

> Some interfaces with app-provided slots allow connection if some expectation is met, which in turn is expressed by some kind of tag attribute on both plug and slot (usually named after the interface) that must match, for example content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some interfaces with app-provided slots allow connections if some expectation is met. This in turn is expressed by some kind of tag attribute on both plug and slot (usually named after the interface) that must match, for example `content`:
```

    slots:
      content:
        allow-installation:
          slot-snap-type:
            - app
            - gadget
        allow-connection:
          plug-attributes:
            content: $SLOT(content)
        allow-auto-connection:
          plug-publisher-id:
            - $SLOT_PUBLISHER_ID
          plug-attributes:
            content: $SLOT(content)

> In these situations often auto-connection is granted then by default if the
> publisher matches as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these situations, auto-connection is often granted by default if the
publisher also matches.
```
